---
title: "How can India get $90 billion more in GDP"
excerpt: "The surprising answer is sleep..."
category: "Book Review"
date: "2025-09-25"
readTime: 
tags: ["Review","Health"]
---

Sleep is the most undermined thing in society. Especially in the modern world. When we have celebrities who brag about sleeping just four hours a day, and the common societal notion that sleep is a waste of time. Little do we know that mother nature spent millions of years in evolution to perfect our sleep and for very good reasons. Right from my childhood, we were asked to wake up early, that five to six hours of sleep is enough, so and so successful person sleeps only four hours a day so we should too etc. Back of the book calculations suggest that out of (let’s say) a hundred years of my life, I should be sleeping for thirty three years cumulatively! (assuming a good eight hours of sleep). Imagine your life if you did something else instead of sleeping for thirty three years! And Matthew Walkers, in his book "Why We Sleep", very well opened my eyes to the fact that I would probably live way less, and a lot worse. 

…(I slept while writing this, Food comma ;)…

In the book, Matthew starts by talking about the Circadian Rhythm and explains why even after a night out, you feel energetic in the morning (only to really collapse by afternoon). He talks about the different states of sleep, majorly the NREM (deep sleep) and REM sleep. REM stands for Rapid Eye Movements and ‘N’ is Non. To explain it simply NREM state of sleep is a deep sleep state which helps us ‘concretise’ and index the knowledge we gained throughout the day and REM sleep helps churn that knowledge and connect the dots with the previously stored knowledge and find unique patterns (I’m sure RAG engineers reading this are getting some dejavu). It is in the REM state that you dream. And the funny thing is that while dreaming, the brain is as active as while awake. The catch being, that during this state, mother nature paralyses your body so that even though in your dreams you may be saving your crush, with your brain having no distinction of dream and reality, your body however, in the real world wouldn’t react to it (or else you may end up scaring your room mate). Reading through, I understood why I have weird dreams, like the one time I was Spiderman saving someone underwater realising spider webs work underwater too! Infact, what you dream can lead to new innovative ideas. That is why all the great scientists and artists worship sleep. Einstein used to sleep for ten hours, we wouldn’t have the Periodic Table today (and thus no Breaking Bad) if it wasn’t hinted to Mendeleev in his sleep. The practical and interesting (and sometimes inhuman) experiments narrated in the books gives the scientific affirmation on the different theories presented about sleep and its different components. I really loved how the experiments are very innovative and thought through to avoid any kind of bias and also to ensure repeatability.

The benefits of sleep are plenty. The word “plenty” is probably not doing justice to it. To providing therapy, to helping you lose weight and look better, to making you sharper to reducing your risk of cancer and even making you more rich, sleep, more than laughter is mother nature’s best medicine. For all the analytical people out there, lack of sleep can costs Billions of dollars in losses for a country or organisation. The Internet tells me that sleep deprivations costs India nearly 1.35% to 3% of the GDP. Which means a whooping $90 billion dollars!. Imagine what we, as a country will become if we can spend $90 billion dollars elsewhere just by sleeping well as a society. I’m sure you are wondering why such a high cost. Well, if you sleep less, you work less and way worse, you are grumpy, you are not creative and your chances of errors in performing a particular task skyrocket. The economic loss in this multiplied by the large population of India gives a scary number. So atleast for the sake of your own country, sleep well, and if you can, ensure other’s sleep well too. Even the global capitalists companies like Google have understood this and they give incentives to employees to sleep more! We at Panoculon Labs too often ask our team how well they are sleeping.

In the modern world, unfortunately, parents have long working hours and come late from work. Thus they eat late and sleep late. Thus the child also sleeps around midnight. Children in general still sleep late at night because of how the circadian rhythm evolves as we age. But now because of the early school timings, the child often has to wake by 5:30 am to catch her bus and be off to school. This results in getting very little sleep, for five days a week. And this is dangerous for the brain development as proven by science. The belief that you can sleep it off over the weekend to account for the sleep loss for the week simply does not work. The sleep lost during the week has done its irreparable damage! The funny thing is that once you get into the habit of sleeping less, you would have the bias that nothing is different and that your energy levels are normal. But in reality you are performing at your sub-optimal level. Experiments conducted in US and Europe by shifting the school timings by just an hour to around 8:30 am, result in a much higher academic performance in students! So if you are a school principal reading this and want your school to perform the best, just let your students sleep more!

In the chapters towards the end Matthew talks about the dangers of sleeping pills and alcohol. Infact alcohol is so bad for your sleep that he recommends that if you have to, drink it in the morning, at-least 8 hours before you sleep. Now I could go on and on about the different striking benefits and necessities of sleep described by Matthew as well as the beautiful evolution of sleep, but I would not do a good as a job as Matthew himself. Would highly recommend this book. Filled with real world experiments and explanations it will convince you more than anything to get a good night’s sleep no matter what. One thing is for sure, I am going to try and sleep in early every day and give myself at-least eight hours of sleep time opportunity.