---
title: "To make a scalable product, make for a difficult niche"
excerpt: "How building for demanding users in a difficult niche can lead to breakthrough products that automatically scale to mass markets."
category: "Business"
date: "2024-12-19"
readTime: 
tags: ["Startup Philosophy"]
---

Back in '23 when we were doing user interviews, our target users, visually impaired people, told us that they don't want a product which is made specifically for them but a product which is widely adopted by the general consumer and just happens to be accessible. Like how the iPhone is marketed as a consumer product for everyone but it also happens to be accessible (via the TalkBack feature). Now of-course not everything can be made that way. For instance the white cane for the blind is specifically designed for the blind and not used by everyone. But in our context, spectacles are a widely adopted accessory and visually impaired people want to use spectacles which the mass audience uses, so that they feel inclusive. The current smart glasses (now AI glasses) in India are not made with this feedback in mind. They are bulky, ugly looking and in most cases wired. The reason for this is that most of the time, the customer and the user in the assistive technology (AT) market in India are different people. The users (people who use the device) are the Divyangjan while the customers (people who pay for it) are generally CSRs or NGOs. Because of this distinction, the voices of the users gets suppressed and they don't even choose to say much since they get the device for free. At Panoculon Labs however, we decided to keep the user in the loop rather than the customer and take the end-user feedback as we keep iterating. 


One peculiar thing we realised from our recent user interactions is that, surprisingly, the visually impaired market segment is very demanding. They are aware of the latest tools available to them, for free, like the Gemini AI app. So for most of the things that AI glasses were supposed to do, like reading text, describing scenery and general visual question answering, the smartphone app can get it done, better and faster. And of-course this was the reason why a lot of consumer AI hardware products failed, like the Rabbit R1 and the Humane AI Pin. These hardwares were expensive and had a lot of latency to answer, while the phone could do the same job in a fraction of seconds. Then what is the value proposition of the glasses, apart from it being handsfree? The users want an AI glass which will continuously scan their surroundings and assist them without any manual prompting required, and to top it off, it should last for at-least 12-14 hours. (more on the user study in a separate blog). Now technology wise, this is very challenging. One needs to figure out smart algorithms to continuously get audio and visual input from the glasses and at the same time maintain a more than good battery life in a sleek form-factor (yes the sleek form-factor is non-negotiable for the users). Then structure all this data, figure out when a user would require assistance, what information is necessary to be communicated to the user and what is not. All of this in real-time. Margin for error and high-latency is very low since a wrong command to keep walking or a late command to stop walking even though there is a pothole in front could be dangerous (However, the reality of this happening is low since VI people actively use white cane and that is far from being replaced even with AI glasses).


Now for a moment, I thought that maybe this market is not right for us with such demanding users. We will have to spend significant time in building this technology. Maybe the general consumer market is better since their demands are much more simple. They just want photo and video capture to share First Person Views on Social Media. That technology is already solved and the market is proven by the RayBan Metas. But thinking deeper, if we make this magical feature possible, it opens plethora of use cases for the general consumer. Imagine you are walking down the street and you meet someone who greets you. You being you, have no idea who that person is. Imagine the AI glasses automatically judge this situation and prompt you the person's name, when you met her last, what you had discussed etc. Or let's say you brushed through an interesting book a week ago in a store, but do not remember the title, you can just ask the AI glasses! It could even keep you safe. Imagine you are walking down the street and the glasses detect some people approaching you with foul intentions, it could alert your close contacts and call for help. It's new years eve, and you want to quit the habit of binge eating, so the glasses automatically alert and motivate you when you enter the kitchen and open up the refrigerator. I could go on. The caveat being all the use cases I mentioned are great to have but are maybe not pressing use cases. And all of the startup _gyaan_ (theory) revolves around solving a _pressing use case_. Currently the pressing use case of this technology is for the visually impaired. But once solved for this segment, it can be translated and scaled to so many different larger (D2C) segments. There are players like Brilliant Labs and Google XR glasses who are trying to build such use cases but having a market for which it is a pressing use case always helps. Even if the feature is not a hundred percent, the VI market will still pay as long as it makes their lives better (and as long as there is no better solution). They would not require much explanation or effort to sell to. But for the general consumer, they will first need to be educated on why they must buy an AI glasses in the first place and how these features may help them. Once the technology is matured and people start deriving value on their own, the flight will take off automatically. We start with a demanding niche for which our solution solves a pressing use case, _today_, and then eventually it scales as others self derive value out of it, _tomorrow_. A lot of consumer tech evolved this way. Blackberry phones, the Internet, Google Maps etc. I sometimes wonder whether to build something that people want, or to build something that people don't know they want yet. The latter seems more exciting and badass. But the less riskier statement would be to "build something which the mass consumer doesn't know that they want yet, but there exists a niche which knows that they want it now and that niche acts as a stepping stone to educate the mass consumer as well as to test your technology".

---