---
title: "Vision in the dark"
excerpt: "The Pinnacle experience of walking in the user’s shoe…"
category: "Business"
date: "2025-10-10"
readTime: 
tags: ["Startup Stories"]
---

Talking to your users and understanding them does not have as much impact as actually feeling and experiencing what they go through yourself… 
(if you are short of time, you can skip to the third paragraph for the actual experience)

It was that time of the year when we get to showcase to a wider audience what we’ve been up to for a year. The Empower conference, India’s premier conference on assistive technology solutions, took place at the IIT Delhi campus. Unlike our participations in the previous editions of the conference with a half-baked prototype, this time we had a fully functioning product ready to take orders. There is a different feeling to it. When you do not have a product, and are still in the prototype stage, you promise so many cool features. You are essentially selling an idea and people are awed. You are not worried about it failing while demoing because you can always say "Oh we are in the prototyping stage". But when you have a sellable product in hand, you are not selling a dream anymore. You are demoing and selling the absolute truth. And truth is often not as good as the dream. The user may still like the product, but you know inside that it could have been better, faster, perhaps more sleeker. You are a bit worried, "What if the demo stops?", "What if the internet dies" (happened quite a lot of times with us unfortunately). Anyways, we got some good feedback from the users. Many of them liked our price offering as well as appreciated it better than the other existing products (yay!). There was one critical feature which they wanted, i.e, walking assistance (more on that feature in <a href="https://www.thegoldenrishabh.com/blog-post.html?id=blog1" target="_blank">To make a scalable product, make for a difficult niche</a>).

While we were at Delhi, we also visited our supporting NGO, Sarthak Educational Trust. We visited their head office in Gurugram. We showed our product to Mr. Ravi who is a completely blind person. He tested it out, appreciated our smart glasses and was willing to buy if it had the walking assistance mode. After noting down the changes required and understanding what are the additional functionalities needed, we got a tour of the facility. Sarthak Educational Trust is a Non for Profit organisation which gives employment training to the Divyangjang. They have multiple rooms which are a simulated version of the actual workplace, like a retail store (with actual goods), an IT department, packing and moving godown etc. They are also responsible for the Indian Paralympics team! The experience which stood out the most and had a lasting impact on me was the “Vision in the dark”.

“Vision in the dark” is a huge room with multiple arenas within it. The only thing forbidden in the room is light. It’s pitch dark, the darkest room I have ever been in (and will ever been in). You will see NOTHING, no matter how hard you try to open your eyes wider (except some very very dim red light from the CCTVs). In this room, there is no distinction between a visually impaired person and you. Mr. Ravi (as introduced above), was our guide. At the start, there were a few statues holding a particular hand gesture which we had to identify by touch. Then there were a few replicas of famous buildings which we had to identify by touch. To walk in this room, you had to walk by the railings or walls. If not, you will lose your sense of orientation. You do not know whether you are going forward or backwards, east or west. Mr Ravi, had done this so many times that he didn’t require any support of the railings or walls. It was as though he had a map in his mind, and an advanced higher dimension positioning system. And no, it was not via step counting, but via landmarks. He knew that when he reaches a statue, he needs to turn left after that. Till now, we had just heard all these methods of navigation and identifying things. But today, we actually experienced it firsthand. We even played cricket in the dark! Did you know that India has a visually impaired cricket team and that there are world championships for these as well!? For this particular category of cricket, the ball is a bit bigger with several small marbles balls inside it. The bowling technique is underarm and you position the ball by the sound it makes while rolling on the ground. Your ears are your eyes here! For my first try, I got bowled out by the experienced Mr. Ravi. But for the next I hit it! We also experienced how the VI users identify that they are in a bridge, by feeling the vibrations of the surface beneath and the surrounding sound. We also experienced how VI users watch a movie! The scenes in the movie are explained in a very nice modulated voice. Your imagination is the screen. It is like listening to an audio book, expect that it is a movie and you can even visualise the production logos and studio intents which are played before the actual movie starts. When the voice was describing the colours as well, it is when I had the innocent question on how do VI people know what colours are? Mr. Ravi answers that they link colours to everyday objects/concepts. For example if I say the “Blue” colour, they link it to “like the sky”. While we were in the room, I was also running mental simulations on how assisted I would have been if I was using our smart glasses. Of course I would be able to recognise everything without the touching, but yes, I would not be alerted of objects automatically while I was walking (unless I ask the glasses specifically for it), thus pressing the need for the walking mode. As we exited the room and were greeted by light, I felt immensely grateful for my eyes and felt a lot of respect for the VI individuals for their extraordinary ability to still navigate the world without complaints. 

This experience gave us new mental models to verify the usefulness of our product before we again approach to users for testing. It also concertised the need for understanding the user inside out to develop a product which actually helps! If you ever visit Gurugram and have a chance to visit Sarthak, do not miss this wonderful and “eye opening” experience!